FAQ - Application Form 
 
1. How do I login to National Scholarship Portal? 
 
1. Access National Scholarship Portal (NSP) using the provided link: NSP: National 
Scholarship Portal 
2. Select the “Students” option. 
3. Then click on “Login” provided under “Apply For Scholarship”. 
4.  Students can log in using any of the following methods:  
 Login with Aadhaar 
 Login with APAAR 
 Login with OTR 
 
2. How do I apply for a Scholarship? 
To apply for a Fresh Application, follow the steps below: 
1. Browse the NSP Application Portal URL - NSP Portal and log in using your 
credentials.  
2. Navigate to the Basic Information section.  
3. Provide the details required in :  
o General Information 
o Academic Details 
o Application Specific Details 
4. After submitting the Basic Information go to the Apply Fresh menu. Carefully 
read the guidelines and accept the terms by clicking on the checkboxes and click 
on continue. 
5. Select the Scholarship category from the dropdown menu:  
o Scholarship 
o Incentive 
6. Click on the Apply button to generate Application ID.  You’ll be redirected to My 
Applications page having the details of the Application ID generated. 
7. Click on Proceed button provided against the Application ID in My Applications 
8. Click on Fill/Edit Application Form. 
9. The list of available schemes will be displayed based on the information 
provided.  
10. Select the desired scheme from the list, upload required documents and click on 
Final Submit. 
 
3. Can I apply for multiple scholarships? 
 
From Academic Year (AY) 2026–27 onwards, students may apply for more than one 
scholarship scheme on NSP, subject to the following conditions: 
• Only one Merit-based Scheme can be applied for in an Academic Year(Including 
Fresh and Renewal). 
• More than one Welfare-based Scheme may be applied for, if eligible. 
The classification of schemes as Merit-based and Welfare-based is available under the 
Schemes on NSP option on the Scholarship Portal homepage. 
To apply for a new scholarship, generate a new Application ID using  Apply Fresh 
menu and follow the steps mentioned in “How do I Apply for Fresh Application” 
section from Step no. 4. 
 
 
4. How can I withdraw my application? 
Follow the below steps to withdraw the application: 
1. Navigate to the My Applications section. 
2. Select the application that you want to withdraw by clicking on Proceed button. 
3. From the Menu, select the Withdraw Application option. 
4. Select the appropriate Withdrawal Remark from dropdown list. 
5. Click on the Withdraw button. 
6. An OTP will be sent to the registered mobile number. 
7. Enter the OTP and confirm the action. 
Upon successful OTP verification, the application will be withdrawn successfully. 
5. When can I withdraw my application? 
 
You can withdraw your application at any time during the application process. Please 
note that you will be able to withdraw your application untill – 
a. If the application is not processed for Payment. 
b. If Scheme’s L2 verification dates are not closed. 
 
6. Can I revoke my application again after withdrawing? 
 
Fresh Application cannot be revoked once withdrawn. 
You can revoke your Renewal application again after withdrawing. To do so, go to My 
Applications page and click on the Proceed button then select ‘Revoke Application’ form 
the menu. 
Please note that you cannot revoke your scholarship application if you fail the following 
conditions: 
a. You already have an active merit based scholarship application and want to 
revoke another merit based scholarship application. 
b. If the application submission date is closed. 
c. If the domicile state of the withdrawn application is different from your current 
active application (if any). 
 
7. Why am I receiving an error while revoking my withdrawn 
renewal application? 
a. If any changes have been made to the Basic Information after the 
application was withdrawn, the application cannot be revoked. 
 
b. To successfully revoke the withdrawn application, please restore the 
Basic Information to exactly how it was before the withdrawal request 
was submitted, and then try revoking the application again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. How can I update my application if it has been marked as defective? 
 
Application may be marked defective by Institute Nodal officers or Scheme Nodal officer 
 
1. Defect for Scheme related changes: If the application is marked defective for 
scheme related changes then you can make the corrections through the following 
steps 
 
 Click on Proceed button provided against the Application ID in My 
Applications. 
 Click on Fill/Edit Application form menu. 
 Make the corrections and submit the Application. 
 
2. Defect for Basic Information : If the application is marked defective for Basic 
information then it can only be corrected when 
 
 There is only one active application. 
 
 If there is more than 1 active application then you have to withdraw all the 
other applications in order to make the corrections in Basic information. 
 
 Defect correction is not allowed if changing the information makes you 
ineligible from the already opted scheme. 
 
 
 
9. How can I apply for multiple incentives? 
 
You can apply for multiple incentives from the ‘Apply Fresh’ page. Click on ‘Apply Fresh’ 
and select ‘Incentive’ from the Application Type dropdown menu. There is no limit to the 
number of incentives you can apply for. 
10. How do I change my Basic Information 
 
If you have already applied for an Scholarship/Incentive, then you will not be able to 
change your Basic Information unless you withdraw your application. Please note all 
of your applications (Scholarship/ incentive) must be withdrawn.  
To know how to withdraw an application, please refer to Section 5 of this document. 
 
11. How do I refresh my contact information? 
You can update your contact information (i.e., Mobile Number, Email ID) via the My 
Profile section. Please note that contact details cannot be edited directly on the 
Application Form. Instead, you must update your contact details on OTR (One-Time 
Registration) and then refresh the updated information into the Application Form using 
the following steps- 
Step 1: Update Contact Information in OTR 
Update E-mail ID 
 Login using any of the methods as specified. 
 Once logged in, go to My Profile. 
 From the left menu, select Update Email. 
 Enter your new Email ID in the designated field and click on Get OTP 
 Enter the OTP sent to your new email. 
 Click on Verify to update your email address. 
Update Mobile No. 
 To update your mobile number, you can click here and then go the ‘Change Mobile No.’ 
from the from the Register Page. 
 Once on the page, you can either authenticate your credentials using your OTR number 
or Reference number. 
  In case of OTR Number, enter your OTR number and get OTP on your current 
registered mobile number. 
  In case of Reference Number, enter your reference number and get OTP on your 
current registered mobile number. 
  Enter the OTP received. 
 Click on Verify button. 
 Once details are verified, you will be able to change your mobile number. 
Step 2: Update Contact Information in Application Form 
  Log in to the Application Form. 
 Navigate to My Profile in the menu. 
  Click on Refresh Mobile No., Email ID from OTR. 
 Compare the details displayed from OTR with those on your application form. 
  If the details are different, click the Update button to Sync the updated information from 
OTR. 
 
12. How do I refresh my eKYC details from OTR? 
To update your eKYC information such as Name, Gender, Profile Photo and Date of 
Birth on the Application Form, you'll need to first update these details on OTR and then 
refresh them in the Application Form. You cannot directly edit these details in the 
Application Form. Follow the steps below to refresh your details: 
Step 1 – Update your eKYC information in OTR 
 Login to OTR using your credentials. 
 Click on Refresh eKYC option. 
 You will be able to view your Aadhaar details already entered. 
 Click on Get OTP button. 
 Enter the OTP received. 
 Click on Verify button. 
 Your eKYC details will be refreshed on OTR. 
Step 2 – Update eKYC information in Application Form 
 Log in to the  Application Form. 
 Go to My Profile on Navigation Menu. 
 Select Refresh eKYC Details from OTR. 
  Click on Refresh Applicant details from OTR. 
  Compare your details as per OTR and as per your application form. 
 Choose the fields you want to update, such as: 
o Name 
o Gender 
o Date of Birth 
o Profile Photo 
 If the details are different then, click on the Update button to update your details 
as per OTR. 
Note – You can update your eKYC details from OTR only before submitting your 
application. If the application is already submitted and you need to update your details, 
you must withdraw the application and submit a fresh one provided scheme date is still 
open. 
 
 
13. How do I refresh my parent's details from OTR? 
You can refresh your Parent's details from OTR i.e. Father’s Name and Mother’s Name 
using My Profile option. The parent’s details cannot be edited directly from the 
Application Form. You need to edit your parent’s details on OTR and then refresh those 
details to Application Form using Refresh Applicant details from OTR option. To 
refresh your parent’s details from OTR, follow the steps below: 
Step 1 – Update your parent’s information in OTR using option provided there. 
Step 2 – Update the parent’s information in Application Form by following below 
mentioned steps: 
  Login to the Application Form. 
  Go to My Profile on Navigation Menu. 
 Select Refresh eKYC Details from OTR. 
 Click on Refresh Parent details from OTR. 
 Choose the fields you want to update, such as: 
o Father’s Name 
o Mother’s Name 
 Click on the Update button to refresh the details as per OTR. 
Note – You can update your parent’s details from OTR only before submitting your 
application. If the application is already submitted and you need to update your details, 
you must withdraw the application and submit a fresh one provided scheme date is still 
open. 
 
 
 
14. How do I link my renewal application with my new OTR? 
NOTE: Link your renewal application in the following situations: 
 You have registered your previous academic year's application ID using OTR 
registered with your parent/ guardian's. 
 You have generated a new OTR using your own Aadhaar number, but the 
previous year's application is not listed in the new OTR. 
To link your renewal application with your profile, ensure the following conditions are 
met: 
 No active new merit based scholarship application exists: If you have 
applied for a new merit based scholarship, please withdraw it before linking the 
renewal application ID. 
 The name, gender, and date of birth on the new OTR must match the details 
on the previous academic year's application ID. 
  OTP-based eKYC will be conducted on the mobile number linked to the 
Aadhaar of your parent/guardian (as provided in the previous academic year's 
application ID). 
Once these conditions are met, follow these steps to link your renewal application: 
 Login to the NSP. 
 Click on Link Renewal Application from Navigation menu. 
  Enter your Renewal Application ID which you want to link. 
 Click on the Submit button. 
 Enter the OTP received on the linked mobile number. 
  Click Submit. 
 
 
15. How do I know which scholarship schemes I am eligible 
for? 
You can find out about your scholarship eligibility before logging into the Application 
Form and filling in the eligibility form using the following steps. It is encouraged to check 
your scheme eligibility before applying. To find out which scholarship schemes you may 
apply for – 
 Go to the scholarship eligibility page by clicking on this link or follow the steps 
mentioned below: 
o Go to NSP Website. 
o Click on the Public section 
o Provide details and click on Check Eligibility. 
 You will be requiring the following details in order to check for your scheme 
eligibility – 
o Domicile State/UT 
o Name (optional) 
o Gender 
 Is single girl child (if opted female) 
o Date of Birth (optional) 
o Marital Status 
o Parent Annual Income 
o Parent Profession 
o Religion 
o Community 
o Is Disabled 
 Percentage of Disability (if disabled) 
o Parents Not Alive (optional) 
o Scholarship Category 
o Application Type 
o Institute Name 
 Search by Institute name 
 Search by AISHE/ UDISE/ ITI (NCVT) Code 
 Search by UDISE Code 
o Course Name 
o Mode of Study 
o Previous Class Percentage 
o Previous Course Year (optional) 
o Previous Board University (optional) 
o Previous Class (optional) 
o 12th Roll Number (optional) 
o 12th Board (optional) 
o 12th Percentage (optional) 
o 10th Roll Number (optional) 
o 10th Percentage (optional) 
o Competitive Roll Number (optional) 
o Competitive Exam (optional) 
o Competitive Exam Year (optional) 
o Exam Conducted By (optional) 
 Enter the Captcha Code and click on the "Check Eligibility" button. 
 You will see a list of scholarship schemes for which you may apply. 
If you don’t see any schemes, you’re eligible for then you can also select that particular 
scheme and from Why I'm not eligible for scheme? option after entering your data 
and find out the exact reasons for your ineligibility. In order to find out why you are not 
eligible for a scheme, you need to follow the steps below – 
 Enter the required details and click the Check Eligibility button. 
  If you are not eligible for any scheme, the "Why am I not eligible for this 
scheme?" option will be displayed. 
  Read the instructions and select one of the following scheme categories: 
o Central Sector Scheme 
o Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
o State Scheme 
  Select the scheme name. 
  Click the Get Your Answer button. 
 The list of reasons for ineligibility will be displayed. 
* Central Sector Scheme will be by default selected 
 
 
16. How do I find my School/ college/ institute details? 
To search for your School/ college/ institute details, follow the steps below: 
 Go to the Institute Details page by clicking on the provided link or follow the steps 
below: 
o Go to the NSP website. 
o Click on the Public section. 
o Click on Search Now under Find Institutes on NSP. 
 You will require the following details to check your institute details: 
o Institution State 
o Institution District 
o Institute/College/ITI 
o School/College/ITI Name (Optional) 
  After entering all the required details, click on the Get Institution List button. 
 Or you can also search your institution name using Search By AISHE/ UDISE/ ITI 
(NCVT) Code in AISHE/ UDISE/ ITI (NCVT) Code field. You will require the 
following details in order to check for your institute details: 
o Choose your option i.e. AISHE/ ITI (NCVT) OR UDISE Code 
o Enter the selected code. 
o Enter Captcha 
o Click on Get institute based on entered AISHE/ UDISE/ ITI (NCVT) Code 
button. 
 You will receive the details of your desired institution. 
 
 
17. How do I find the Nodal Officer for my scholarship scheme? 
To find the Nodal Officer details for scholarship scheme, follow the steps below: 
 Go to the Nodal Officer page by clicking on the provided link or follow the steps 
below: 
o Go to the NSP website. 
o Click on the Public section. 
o Click on View under Nodal Officers (Scheme-wise). 
 You will require the following details to check your Nodal Officer details: 
o Select one of the following options: 
 Ministry 
 State 
 District 
 Zone 
o In case of Ministry: 
 Select Ministry. 
 Enter Captcha Code. 
 Click on the Submit button. 
o In case of State: 
 Select Ministry. 
 Select Scheme. 
 Select State. 
 Enter Captcha Code. 
 Click on the Submit button. 
o In case of District: 
 Select Ministry. 
 Select Scheme. 
 Select State. 
 Select District. 
 Enter Captcha Code. 
 Click on the Submit button. 
o In case of Zone: 
 Select Ministry/Zone. 
 Enter Captcha Code. 
 Click on the Submit button. 
 After clicking the Submit button, you will be able to view the list of Nodal Officers 
for your scholarship scheme. Copy the required details and click on 
the OK button.