Standard Operating 
Procedures 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP) 
 
 
 
 
Version 1.0 
24th July 2019 
 
  

National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 2 of 17 
 
 
Document control 
Document Title: Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Document Creation: 
Release 
No. 
Date Revision Description Author/Reviewer 
Ver 1.0 24-July-19 
First Published Version after 
review & Incorporation of 
Comments 
NSP Team, NIC 
DBT Mission, 
Central Ministries of the 
onboarded schemes 
 
  
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 3 of 17 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. NATIONAL SCHOLARSHIP PORTAL OVERVIEW ......................................................................................... 5 
2. PURPOSE OF THE DOCUMENT ................................................................................................................. 5 
3. OVERALL NSP WORKFLOW ...................................................................................................................... 5 
4. USERS OF NSP AND THEIR ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES ........................................................................ 6 
4.1. USERS OF NSP .......................................................................................................................................... 6 
4.2. ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES........................................................................................................................... 6 
4.2.1. Student/ Applicant ........................................................................................................................ 6 
4.2.2. Institute Nodal Officer .................................................................................................................. 9 
4.2.3. District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer ........................................................................................ 11 
4.2.4. Scheme owner Ministries / Departments / Other Govt. bodies .................................................. 13 
4.2.5. Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology ..................................................................... 15 
4.2.6. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Mission, Cabinet Secretariat ........................................................ 15 
4.2.7. National Informatics Center (NIC) .............................................................................................. 15 
4.2.8. Help Desk .................................................................................................................................... 16 
5. GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS IN RESPECT OF STAKEHOLDERS: .................................................... 16 
 
  
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 4 of 17 
 
 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Description 
AISHE All India Survey on Higher Education 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
FAQs Frequently Asked Questions 
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MMP Mission Mode Project 
NCVT National Council for Vocational Training 
SCVT State Council for Vocational Training 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NSP National Scholarship Portal 
NUEPA National University for Education Planning and Administration 
OTP One Time Password (delivered on mobile) 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PMU Project Management Unit 
SMART Simplified, Mission-oriented, Accountable, Responsive and 
Transparent 
U-DISE Unified District Information System for Education 
  
 
  
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 5 of 17 
 
 
1. National Scholarship Portal Overview 
NSP is one -stop solution through which various services starting from student application, 
application receipt, verification, processing, and disbursal of various scholarships to students 
are facilitated. National Scholarship Portal is taken as Mission Mode Project (MMP) under 
Digital India. This initiative aims at providing a Simplified, Mission -oriented, Accountable, 
Responsive and Transparent 'SMART' System for faster and effective disbursal of Scholarship 
to eligible applicants directly into their account through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) without 
any leakages. 
2. Purpose of the Document 
This document defines Roles and Responsibilities of all users of NSP, and briefly conveys the 
high-level processes involved while operating NSP.  
3. Overall NSP Workflow 
The overall workflow for NSP is as below: 
Start
Student 
Registration 
and 
Application 
Submission
Level 1 
Verification 
of Application 
at Institute 
Level
Level 2/3 
Verification 
of Application 
at District/
State/
Ministry Level
Beneficiary 
Records 
Creation and 
Account 
Validation by 
PFMS 
Applications 
Deduplication 
and Merit List 
Generation 
Payment File 
Generation 
and Financial 
Approval
Scholarship 
Disbursement 
through DBT
Stop
 
The steps involved in NSP are as follows: 
➢ Step-1: Student Registration and Application Submission 
➢ Step-2: Level 1 Verification of Application at Institute Level 
➢ Step-3: Level 2/3 Verification of Application at District/State/Ministry Level 
➢ Step-4: Beneficiary Records Creation and Account Validation by PFMS 
➢ Step-5: Applications Deduplication and Merit List Generation 
➢ Step-6: Payment File Generation and Financial Approval 
➢ Step-7: Scholarship Disbursement through DBT 
Kindly refer User manual(s) for steps involved at each of the above steps. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 6 of 17 
 
 
4. Users of NSP and their Roles and Responsibilities 
This section enlists the essential users of NSP, and enumerate s their brief roles and 
responsibilities. 
4.1. Users of NSP 
The primary users of NSP are as under: 
a) Student / Applicant 
b) Institute Nodal Officer 
c) District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer 
d) Scheme owner Ministries / Departments / Other Govt. bodies 
e) Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology 
f) Direct Benefit Transfer(DBT) Mission, Cabinet Secretariat 
g) National Informatics Center (NIC) 
h) Help Desk 
4.2. Roles & Responsibilities 
The user-wise Roles & Responsibilities are as per the subsections below: 
4.2.1. Student/ Applicant 
The primary role of the Student/  Applicant is to register and submit the application at NSP. 
The student/applicant who is applying for the first time on NSP portal,  is referred to as Fresh 
Students, and the students who have been granted scholarship in any of the scheme on-boarded 
at NSP in the immediately preceding Academic Year, are referred to as Renewal students. The 
student/applicant using the NSP must adhere to the following: 
1. Registration Process for Fresh Students: 
a) Students applying for scholarship for the first time need to  "Register" on the portal 
as fresh applicant , using the icon “New Registration” at NSP Portal URL - 
https://scholarships.gov.in/, by providing accurate and correct information as per their 
documents. 
b) Before initiating registration process, students are advised to carefully go through the 
“Guidelines for Registration on National Scholarship Portal” and keep their 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 7 of 17 
 
 
Educational and other documents such as Aadhaar number, Enrolment number, Bank 
passbook etc. in hand. 
c) Fields marked as ‘*’ are mandatory. 
d) Students who have been assigned Aadhaar shall mandatorily provide their Aadhaar 
number in their application. 
e) Student(s)/The Student who do not possess Aadhaar shall provide the enrolment ID  
(if available), and upload scanned copy Bank Passbook with Photograph, in PDF or 
JPEG format (Maximum size 200 KB) . The student will also be required to upload 
bonafide student certificate from Institute / School in along with their application 
form.  
f) Upon submitting all the details on registration page , s tudent will get a unique 
application ID and password through SMS on the provided( registered) mobile 
number.  
g) The student shall login to NSP using application ID and password received. The 
student must change the password upon first login. This password has to be kept safely 
and confidentially. The student can change the mobile number only before the  first 
login, i.e. before changing the received password. 
h) The student can apply in any of the scheme on-boarded on NSP by providing accurate 
and correct information as per their documents, and shall  submit the documents to the 
Institute after Final submission of the application at NSP portal. 
i) The detailed procedure for filling the application form has been provided in the User 
Manual for Applicants. 
2. Process for Renewal Students: 
a) Renewal Students are the students who ha ve been granted scholarship in any of the 
scheme on-boarded at NSP, in the immediately preceding Academic Year. 
b) Renewal Students can only apply for renewal of scholarship in the same scheme, for 
which they have been granted scholarship in the previous Academic Year. Student is 
required to update their marks  obtained in previous year and submit the application  
on NSP Portal. The student must keep the account in which scholarship was received 
in previous year as active (i.e. non -dormant) and functional to receive scholarship 
amount. 
c) In case the student wish to apply for any other scheme,  he/she must login using their 
previous year’s application ID and password, select the option for withdrawing the 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 8 of 17 
 
 
renewal application, and then register as a Fresh Student in the current Academic 
Year. Thereafter, they shall follow the process for Fresh Application. 
3. Precautions to be taken 
a) The student/applicant must ensure that the Bank Account details (A/c Number, IFSC 
Code) submitted is correct and keep the  account active (i.e. non -dormant) and 
functional to receive scholarship amount (i.e. Any condition imposed on accounts by 
bank, like seeding of AADHAAR, any limit on receiving credit in accounts etc., which 
may hamper scholarship credit in account should be complied with). 
b) The student/applicant must ensure that the resolution/quality of documents uploaded 
is adequate so that they are clear and readable. 
c) The student/applicant must ensure that the mobile number provided in the application 
is correct and belongs to the student/ applicant. 
d) The student/applicant must s elect the desired scheme from list of schemes available 
as per the eligibility criteria of the scheme(s). 
e) The student/applicant must take timely action(s) on the SMS received from NSP. 
f) The student/applicant must follow up with Institutes for application verification before 
the deadlines. 
g) The student/applicant must rectify the error(s) and comply with the remarks made in 
the application in case the application is marked as defective in NSP. 
h) The student/applicant shall note that applications marked rejected / fake by the nodal 
officer during the verification / reverification process will not be considered for further 
processing on NSP. 
i) The student/applicant must carefully select their institute. If  applicant selects some 
other institute by mistake, he or she will have to get their application marked defected 
from the selected institute and then Institute can be corrected. 
j) The student/applicant shall note that p riority for Scholarship Disbursement wi ll be 
given to the Aadhaar seeded bank accounts. 
k) The student/applicant shall note that NSP provides only one chance for updating bank 
account details (only in case when bank accounts details are not validated by PFMS). 
Applicants should be cautious to exercise this option, failing which the application 
will not be considered for scholarship. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 9 of 17 
 
 
4.2.2. Institute Nodal Officer 
The primary role of the Institute Nodal officer is 1 st Level verification of the applications 
submitted by applicants at NSP. The application form for student has been simplified with  
minimal uploading of scanned documents by students on NSP. Hence, the role of the Institute 
Nodal officer becomes very critical in the entire chain of verification process. The Institute 
Nodal officer using NSP must adhere to the following:  
1. Institute Registration Process 
a) The Institute/School/ITI shall possess a valid AISHE/DISE/NCVT /SCVT code, 
before registering on NSP.  
b) The Institute/School/ITI with valid AISHE/DISE/NCVT/SCVT codes can register on 
NSP. To know whether Institute/School/ITI is registered on NSP Portal or not, go to 
https://scholarships.gov.in and click on “Search Institute/School/ITI”. 
c) The Institute/School/ITI, with valid AISHE/DISE/NCVT/SCVT code and not 
registered on NSP can request the District or State Nodal Officer, of any Scholarship 
scheme onboarded on NSP, to add it on NSP. 
d) The District or State Nodal Officer will search for the Institute based on 
AISHE/DISE/NCVT/SCVT code. In case the institute is not reg istered, the Nodal 
Officer can add it by providing the requisite details. The system generated User 
credentials and password will be sent on the mobile number provided. 
e) Colleges/Universities/Institutes/Schools and any other educational establishments 
onboarded on NSP shall be referred to as Institutes. 
2. Institute Nodal Officer: Registration process 
a) From Academic Year 2019-20 onwards, Institute logging in the first time will have to 
mandatorily fill the Institute Nodal Officer Registration Form. 
b) The Institute Nodal officer will login on NSP using the user credentials, and complete 
Institute Nodal Officer Registration Form by entering  his/her details and uploading 
the identity document. The Institute Nodal officer after locking the form using the 
OTP received, will take the print, paste his/her photograph on the Form, get it attested 
by the Institute Head  (Signature and Institute seal/stamp), will submit the physical 
form to the respective District/ State/ Ministry Nodal officer of any scheme onboarded 
on NSP. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 10 of 17 
 
 
c) The District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer will verify the physical form and the details 
entered in system , and approve/reject the Institute Nodal Officer Registration Form 
details on NSP using the option  “Verify Institute Registration F orm” under the 
Administration section in his login. The User credentials and new password will be 
sent to the registered mobile number of the Institute Nodal officer . The original 
physical copy of the form should be kept with District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer 
and a duplicate copy is to be shared with Institute Nodal officer, who shall keep the 
same in Institute’s records. 
d) The institute Nodal officer can login using the new User credentials, password and 
OTP received on his/her mobile number. The concerned officer can reset the password 
by clicking the “Forgot Password” on Institute Login page on NSP. 
e) For the cases of registration, where previous Institute Nodal has been transferred and 
has not provided the login credentials to the new Institute Nodal O fficer, the new 
Institute Nodal Officer shall formally request District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer 
to change the mobile number and send the login credentials to the new mobile number. 
The new Nodal Officer is responsible for updating the profile with his/her credentials. 
f) In case the new Institute Nodal Officer has access to the previous Nodal Officer, the 
registered mobile number can be changed by existing Nodal Officer. The system asks 
for the OTP on previous mobile number and the new mobile number to be registered. 
The existing Nodal Officer is also primarily responsible for updating the profile with 
credentials of the new Nodal Officer. 
3. Institute Nodal Officer: Profile updation 
a) The Institute Nodal Officer shall submit the Institute details in the prof ile, and select 
the Course Levels offered by the Institute. 
b) The Institute Nodal Officer shall ensure that the profile details of the Institute are 
updated from time to time. 
c) The Institute Nodal Officer shall submit the correct bank account details of the 
Institute. 
d) The Institute Nodal Officer shall update the offered courses and course fee charged 
for each course Level. 
e) The Institute Nodal Officer shall regularly change the password. 
f) The Institute Nodal Officer shall ensure that the profile is updated profi le with the 
details of the New Nodal officer before updating the mobile number and email ID, in 
case of change of Nodal officer. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 11 of 17 
 
 
4. 1st Level Verification Process & Steps 
a) The Institute Nodal officer must verify the correctness of details in the application form 
and uploaded documents submitted by the student/ applicant, and maintain physical 
copies of supporting documents submitted by the student/ applicant . The 
District/State/Ministry Nodal Officer can ask for copies of these documents from the 
Institute Nodal Officers, as and when required. 
b) The Institute Nodal officer has the option  to either Verify the application, Reject the 
application or Defect the application . In case she/he chooses to Reject or Defect the 
application, the reasons for rejection or def ect must be provided, so that the same can 
be displayed to the student/applicant. 
c) The Application defected by the Institute will be returned to student/applicant for 
correcting the same, and once submitted by the student/applicant, the application will 
be shown under Reverification section of NSP application. 
d) The Institute Nodal Officer shall e nsure that appropriate due diligence is done before 
verification of applications in accordance with the Scheme guidelines, and internal 
procedure as prescribed by Institute authorities / Government are followed. 
e) The Institute Nodal Officer shall ensure that the applications are scrutinized well-in-
time by the Institute, thus avoiding the last-minute rush to verify the applications. 
f) The Institute Nodal Officer shall ens ure that there are no pending applications , as on 
last date of L1 verification for that particular scheme, and all applications submitted by 
students/applicants to the Institute are scrutinized (verified/rejected/defected along with 
appropriate reason, as the case may be). 
g) The Institute Nodal Officer can mark any application as Fake at any stage before the 
payment is made, using the option “Mark as Fake” under the Verification section in 
his/her profile, in case a fraud is suspected in the application. 
4.2.3. District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer 
The primary role of District/  State/ Ministry Nodal officer is 2 nd/3rd Level verification (as per 
the scheme guidelines) of the applications submitted at NSP  and verified by Institutes . The 
District/ State/ Ministry Nodal officer using NSP must comply with the following- 
1. District/ State level Nodal Officer User Creation Process 
a) The login credentials for State Nodal Officers are created when the Ministry Nodal 
officers create the user for State. The Ministry Nodal officer enters the following details 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 12 of 17 
 
 
to create the State user – State Name, State Nodal Officer Name, Designation, Mobile 
No., Email ID and Address of the State Nodal Officer. Once these details are entered 
in the system, a unique User name is generated by the  system, and username and 
password is sent to the mobile no. of State Nodal Officer as registered by the Ministry 
Nodal officer. 
b) The login credentials for District Nodal Officers are created when the State Nodal 
officers create the user for District. The State Nodal officer enters the following details 
to create the District user – District Name, District Nodal Officer Name, Designation, 
Mobile No., Email ID and Address of the District Nodal Officer. Once these details are 
entered in the system, a unique Us er name is generated by the system, and username 
and password is sent to the mobile no.  of District Nodal Officer  as registered by the 
State Nodal officer. 
c) In case of change in District Nodal officer, she/he shall approach the State Nodal 
Officer with a request to reset the password and change mobile number. 
d) Similarly, in case of State Nodal Officer, she/he shall approach Ministry level Nodal 
officer with a request to reset the password and change mobile number. 
2. District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer: Adding / Verification of Institute(s) 
a) The District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer reset the password of a registered Institute 
using the option “Reset Institute Login Password” under the Administration section in 
his/her profile. He/She shall search for th e Institute using Institute Name or 
AISHE/DISE/NCVT/SCVT Code. He/She can select the Institute from the list 
displayed in search results, and click on reset the password. He/She also has the facility 
to change the mobile number of Institute Nodal Officer through this option, so that the 
OTP is received on the mobile number of current officer.  
b) The District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer can add new Institute using the option “Add 
Institute/School” under the Administration section in his/her profile. He/She shall 
search for the Institute using Institute Name or AISHE/DISE/NCVT/SCVT Code. If the 
Institute is already registered, the District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer can reset the 
password. If Institute is not registered, he/she can register the Institute and create User 
credentials of the Institute by providing details such as Institute Nodal Officer Name 
and Mobile number. The User credentials will be generated by the system, and will be 
sent as an SMS to the provided mobile number. The Institute Nodal Of ficer can then 
proceed for the Institute Nodal Officer registration as per the process.  
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 13 of 17 
 
 
c) The District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer shall ensure that the Institute Nodal Officer 
registration is approved  on the NSP portal  after physically verifying the cer tified 
Institute Registration form submitted by the Institute Nodal Officer, along with 
photograph and identity proof. 
3. 2nd Level Verification Process & Steps 
a) The District/ State/ Ministry Nodal Officer shall verify the correctness of details in the 
application form and uploaded documents submitted by the student/applicant as per 
guidelines of the related scheme. 
b) The District / State / Ministry Level Nodal officer can either Verify the application , 
Defect the Application, Reject the applications or Mark the application as Fake. In case 
she/he chooses to Defect the Application, Reject the application or Mark the application 
as fake, the reasons must be provided, so that the same can be displayed to the 
student/applicant. 
c) The District / State / Ministry Level N odal officer shall monitor overall pendency of 
the applications for the scheme at Institute Level. 
d) The District / State / Ministry Level Nodal officer shall ensure that the applications are 
scrutinized well-in-time by the Institute, thus avoiding the last-minute rush to verify the 
applications. 
4. 3rd Level Verification Process & Steps 
a) For the schemes that require third level of verification, the State/ Ministry Nodal Officer 
shall follow the same process as followed for 2nd Level Verification. 
4.2.4. Scheme owner Ministries / Departments / Other Govt. bodies 
The primary role of the Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/Other Govt. bodies  is to 
onboard the scheme at NSP, and monitor the overall progress of the scheme. This includes all 
three types of schemes, i.e. Central Schemes, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State Schemes. 
The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies must: 
a) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/  Other Govt. bodies  shall p rovide 
confirmation for adherence to the NSP guidelines. 
b) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall provide Scheme 
guidelines, Configuration details, FAQs to NIC. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 14 of 17 
 
 
c) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall provide PFMS 
configuration details (agenc y ID, Agency name, PFMS scheme code, DBT mission 
code, beneficiary type, payment purpose code) at the time of onboarding schemes only.  
d) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall ensure that the 
given PFMS details are properly configured at PFMS Portal. 
e) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies  shall a ct as Data 
fiduciary for all data at NSP, for their scheme(s). 
f) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies  shall v erify the 
correctness of Scheme configuration on NSP, including but not limited to the eligibility 
criteria, important dates etc. 
g) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall monitor overall 
progress of the scheme, including L1 and L2/L3 verification progress. 
h) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies  shall i ssue timely 
instructions to District/State/Ministry Nodal Officers. 
i) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies  shall p rovide 
trainings to State/District Nodal officers from time to time. 
j) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall provide name of 
Central / State Nodal Officers along with contact details to be displayed on the portal, 
and validate the same from time to time. 
k) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall provide data and 
reports concerning the scheme to Govt. organizations, as may be required, using 
different pre-defined standard reports/ query generated by NSP.  
l) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall abide by IT Act, 
Aadhaar Act and all other Government rules and regulations, from time to time. 
m) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies shall operate NSP 
portal for all activities. 
n) The Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ O ther Govt. bodies  shall answer the 
queries of any law enforcement agency / RTI related to Scheme(s), Applications 
received at NSP, Timelines of the scheme(s), workflow, operations, servers, the content 
data and transaction data, etc. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 15 of 17 
 
 
4.2.5. Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology 
The Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) is the overall owner of 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP), and shall oversee the end -to-end processes of NSP. 
Designated officers from MeitY shall: 
a) Provide administrative approvals for NSP to NIC. 
b) Provide inputs for value addition in NSP. 
c) Monitor and review the NSP. 
4.2.6. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Mission, Cabinet Secretariat 
The Direct Benefit Transfer(DBT) Mission, Cabinet Secretariat, Government of India plays 
pivotal role in administration of National Scholarship portal, and is primarily responsible for 
overall coordination with all the Scheme Owner Ministries/ Departments/ Other Govt. bodies, 
streamline the processes, and provide guidance to MeitY and NIC from time to time. 
Designated officers from DBT mission shall: 
a) Provide approval for the Important dates and deadlines for all Schemes on-boarded on 
NSP. 
b) Review the Standard Operating Procedures / Guidelines / User Manuals and other key 
documents, which are to be circulated to NSP users. 
c) Provide guidance and coordinate for integration and data sharing with key bodies such 
as AISHE, DISE, NCVT, PFMS, UIDAI, etc. 
d) Provide time-to-time guidance and suggestions for improvisations in NSP. 
e) Review the forms/report/workflows etc. for NSP. 
4.2.7. National Informatics Center (NIC) 
National Information Center (NIC) is the technical agency for developing and maintaining the 
NSP, as per the guidance provide by Scheme Owner Ministries/Departments/ Other Govt. 
bodies, DBT Mission and MeitY. NIC shall: 
a) Develop and Maintain NSP  infrastructure, including software and hardware 
components. 
b) Receive the requests for onboarding of schemes at NSP. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 16 of 17 
 
 
c) Share the NSP guidelines with the Scheme Owner Ministries/  Departments/ Other 
Govt. bodies. 
d) Configure the Scheme as per details provided by the Scheme Owner Ministries/  
Departments/ Other Govt. bodies. 
e) Make changes in NSP application as per the recommendations o f Scheme Owner 
Ministries/Departments/Other Govt. bodies, DBT Mission and MeitY. 
f) Draft important documents such as  Standard Operating Procedures, Guidelines, User 
Manuals etc. in English language, and regularly update the same. 
g) Undertake security audit of NSP from time to time. 
h) Manage the integrations and data exchange with external applications. 
i) Manage helpdesk for operations at NSP. 
4.2.8. Help Desk 
Help Desk for NSP is maintained by NIC, with support from external call center agency. The 
primary role of the hel pdesk is to provide first level assistance to the users of NSP. The 
helpdesk shall: 
a) Assist the student(s)/applicant(s) for  filling the registration and application forms, and 
provide technical support. 
b) Escalate the critical issues to NSP team, as and when required. 
c) Maintain a list of User category-wise FAQs for several users of the portal. 
d) Keep the operators of call center agency updated about the processes at NSP. 
5. General Terms and Conditions in respect  of 
stakeholders: 
1. The source code/ technical artifact s/ utilities of the application software developed by 
NIC will be the property of NIC. NIC can reuse the common and standard code/ 
artifacts/ utilities used in the software applications in other Govt. Projects wherever 
these are needed.  
2. All parties undertake to act in good faith in respect of/with respect to each other’s rights 
under this understanding and to adopt all reasonable measures to ensure the realization 
of the objectives of this project as per the roles and responsibilities. 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)  Standard Operating Procedures 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   Page 17 of 17 
 
 
3. Government may take action against any illegal or unauthorized activity on the NSP 
portal. 
4. NIC will not be directly answering any RTI related queries/ clarifications/ law  
enforcement agency/ court cases  and cannot be asked by respective Scheme Owner 
Ministries/ Departments or Other Govt. bodies  whose Scholarship Schemes are 
operational to be present before the Information Commission/  Courts either at State/  
National levels or any other such body. 
5. The outcome of validation(s) done by external agencies like PFMS, UIDAI will be 
treated as final. Any grievance related with such outcome should be dealt with by nodal 
verifying agency. 
6. NIC shall be entitled for full disclaimer and immunity from all aspects of data and its 
safety along with its handling by any func tionary of the  respective Scheme Owner 
Ministries/ Departments or Other Govt. bodies.